Integration of Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury kernels into QMCkl (#24)
TREX-CoE/qmckl: org/qmckl_sherman_morrison_woodbury.org

#+TITLE: Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury
#+SETUPFILE: ../tools/theme.setup
#+INCLUDE: ../tools/lib.org

Low- and high-level functions that use the Sherman-Morrison and
 Woodbury matrix inversion formulas to update the inverse of a

>  non-singualr matrix

Author: non-singular

 
* Headers
  #+begin_src elisp :noexport :results none :exports none
(org-babel-lob-ingest "../tools/lib.org")
#+end_src

  #+begin_src c :comments link :tangle (eval c_test) :noweb yes
#include "qmckl.h"
#include "assert.h"
#ifdef HAVE_CONFIG_H
#include "config.h"
#endif
#include <math.h>

int main() {
  qmckl_context context;
  context = qmckl_context_create();

  qmckl_exit_code rc;
  #+end_src

  

> * Helper Functions

Author: This does not seem possible. The code is generated in such way that moving the header part down makes the code not compile.

  
Helper functions that are used by the Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury kernels. 

> These functions can only be used internally by higher level functions.

Author: Replace by Private helper functions

** ~qmckl_slagel_splitting~
   :PROPERTIES:
   :Name:     qmckl_slagel_splitting
   :CRetType: double
   :FRetType: double precision
   :END:

   ~qmckl_slagel_splitting~ is used internally to apply a list of rank-1 updates while splitting an update if necessary.
   In case of a split it applies the first half of the update while putting the second half in waiting queue to be applied at the end.
  
   For a given update $u_j$ we define a threshold value $\epsilon_j$, which is the minimum value of 
   $1+v_j^TS^{-1}u_j$ for a non-singular matrix $S$. If $1+v_j^TS^{-1}u_j \geq \epsilon_j$, 

>    the update is applied as usual. Otherwise, $u_j$ will be redefined as $\frac{u_j}{2}$, and the other half 
>    (to be applied at the end) will be defined using vectors $\frac{u_{j'}}{2}$ and $v_{j'}^T=v_{j'}^T$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the update is applied as usual. Otherwise, the current update $u_j$ will be redefined as $\frac{u_j}{2}$. The missing half-update will be delayed to the end of the algorithm; it is stored in the waiting-queue `later_updates`.
```

   
   #+NAME: qmckl_slagel_splitting_args
   | uint64_t | Dim                            | in    | Leading dimension of Slater_inv                               |
   | uint64_t | N_updates                      | in    | Number of rank-1 updates to be applied to Slater_inv          |
   | double   | Updates[N_updates*Dim]         | in    | Array containing the rank-1 updates                           |
   | uint64_t | Updates_index[N_updates]       | in    | Array containing positions of the rank-1 updates              |
   | double   | breakdown                      | in    | Break-down parameter on which to fail or not                  |
   | double   | Slater_inv[Dim*Dim]            | inout | Array containing the inverse Slater-matrix                    |
   | double   | later_updates[Dim * N_updates] | inout | Array containing the split updates for later                  |
   | uint64_t | later_index[N_updates]         | inout | Array containing the positions of the split updates for later |
   | uint64_t | later                          | inout | Number of split updates for later                             |
  

*** Requirements

>     - ~Dim >= 2~

Author: Expres in terms of element, not in bytes. Also Updates is not multiplied by N_updates! 
 ** Change for all following kernels.

>     - ~Dim >= 2~

Reviewer: Can we also add an 
```c
assert(Dim >= 2);
```
at the beginning of the code.

#include "qmckl.h"

qmckl_exit_code qmckl_slagel_splitting_c(uint64_t Dim,
                                              uint64_t N_updates,
                                              const double *Updates, 
                                              const uint64_t *Updates_index,
                                              const double breakdown,
                                              double *Slater_inv,
                                              double *later_updates, 
                                              uint64_t *later_index,
                                              uint64_t *later) {
// #ifdef DEBUG //  Leave commented out since debugging information is not yet implemented in QMCkl.
//   std::cerr << "Called slagel_splitting with " << N_updates << " updates" << std::endl;
// #endif

  double C[Dim];
  double D[Dim];

  uint64_t l = 0;
  // For each update
  while (l < N_updates) {
    // C = S^{-1} x U_l
    for (uint64_t i = 0; i < Dim; i++) {
      C[i] = 0;
      for (uint64_t j = 0; j < Dim; j++) {
        C[i] += Slater_inv[i * Dim + j] * Updates[l * Dim + j];
      }
    }

    // Denominator
    double den = 1 + C[Updates_index[l] - 1];

>     if (fabs(den) < breakdown) {

Author: Add comment explaining this block (split)

      // U_l = U_l / 2 (do the split)
      for (uint64_t i = 0; i < Dim; i++) {
        later_updates[*later * Dim + i] = Updates[l * Dim + i] / 2.0;
        C[i] /= 2.0;
      }
      later_index[*later] = Updates_index[l];
      (*later)++;

      den = 1 + C[Updates_index[l] - 1];
    }
    double iden = 1 / den;

    // D = v^T x S^{-1}
    for (uint64_t j = 0; j < Dim; j++) {
      D[j] = Slater_inv[(Updates_index[l] - 1) * Dim + j];
    }

    // S^{-1} = S^{-1} - C x D / den
    for (uint64_t i = 0; i < Dim; i++) {
      for (uint64_t j = 0; j < Dim; j++) {
        double update = C[i] * D[j] * iden;
        Slater_inv[i * Dim + j] -= update;
      }
    }
    l += 1;
  }

  return QMCKL_SUCCESS;
}

    #+end_src
    
*** Performance

> This function performce better for cycles with 1 rank-1 update and with a high fail-rate.

Reviewer: Check and eventually update the performance recommendations following new report.

     real    (c_double ) , intent(in)  , value :: breakdown
     real    (c_double ) , intent(inout)        :: Slater_inv(Dim*Dim)
     real    (c_double ) , intent(inout)        :: later_updates(Dim * N_updates)
     integer (c_int64_t) , intent(inout)        :: later_index(N_updates)
     integer (c_int64_t) , intent(inout)        :: later

     integer(c_int32_t), external :: qmckl_slagel_splitting_c
     info = qmckl_slagel_splitting_c &
	    (Dim, N_updates, Updates, Updates_index, breakdown, Slater_inv, later_updates, later_index, later)

   end function qmckl_slagel_splitting
   #+end_src

*** Test                                                           :noexport:

  This kernel does not have an explicit test because it is only used internally by higher-level Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury kernels.

* Naïve Sherman-Morrison
  
** ~qmckl_sherman_morrison~
   :PROPERTIES:
   :Name:     qmckl_sherman_morrison
   :CRetType: qmckl_exit_code
   :FRetType: qmckl_exit_code
   :END:

   This is the simplest of the available Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury
   kernels. It applies rank-1 updates one by one in the order
   that is given. It only checks if the denominator in the

>    Sherman-Morrison formula is not too close to zero when an update is evaluated.

Reviewer: Specify "too close to zero".

>    It will exit with an error code of the denominator is too close to zero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   It will exit with an error code when the denominator is too close to zero.
```

   The formula that is applied is
   \[

>     (S + uv^T)^{-1} = S^{-1} - \frac{S^{-1} uv^T S^{-1}}{1 + v^T S^{-1} u}

Reviewer: Check that notations are uniform across the whole document.

rc = qmckl_sherman_morrison_c(context, Dim, N_updates1, Updates1, Updates_index1, breakdown, Slater_inv1);
for (unsigned int i = 0; i < Dim; i++) {
  for (unsigned int j = 0; j < Dim; j++) {
    res[i * Dim + j] = 0;
    for (unsigned int k = 0; k < Dim; k++) {
      res[i * Dim + j] += Slater1[i * Dim + k] * Slater_inv1[k * Dim + j];
    }
  }
}
rc = QMCKL_SUCCESS;
for (unsigned int i = 0; i < Dim; i++) {
  for (unsigned int j = 0; j < Dim; j++) {
    if (i == j && fabs(res[i * Dim + j] - 1) > tolerance) {
      rc = QMCKL_FAILURE;
    }
    if (i != j && fabs(res[i * Dim + j]) > tolerance) {
      rc = QMCKL_FAILURE;
    }
  }

> }

Reviewer: Once PR #27 is merged, please add a `vfc_probe` here that check significant digits of Frobenius norm.

Reviewer 2: @fmgjcoppens Can you please add a TODO here so that we don't forget ?

for (unsigned int i = 0; i < Dim; i++) {
  for (unsigned int j = 0; j < Dim; j++) {
    if (i == j && fabs(res[i * Dim + j] - 1) > tolerance) {
      rc = QMCKL_FAILURE;
    }
    if (i != j && fabs(res[i * Dim + j]) > tolerance) {
      rc = QMCKL_FAILURE;
    }
  }
}
assert(rc == QMCKL_SUCCESS);
     #+end_src

* Sherman-Morrison with update splitting
  
** ~qmckl_sherman_morrison_splitting~
   :PROPERTIES:
   :Name:     qmckl_sherman_morrison_splitting
   :CRetType: qmckl_exit_code
   :FRetType: qmckl_exit_code
   :END:

   This is a variation on the 'Naive' Sherman-Morrison kernel. Whenever the denominator $1+v_j^T S^{-1} u_j$ in
   the Sherman-Morrison formula is deemed to be too close to zero, the update $u_j$ is split in half:
   $u_j \rightarrow \frac{1}{1} u_j$. One half is applied immediately --necessarily increasing the value of the
   denominator because of the split-- while the other halve is put in a queue that will be applied when all the
   remaining updates have been treated. The kernel is executed recursively until the queue is eiter empty and all
   updates are applied successfully, or the size of the queue equals the number of initial updates. In the last

>    case the Slater-matrix that would have resulted from applying the updates is un-invertable and therefore the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   case the Slater-matrix that would have resulted from applying the updates is singular and therefore the
```
